Add array API aot/jit blogpost (#978)
Quansight/Quansight-website: apps/labs/posts/array-api-aot-jit.md

---
title: 'Array API adoption: what to do with compiled code'
authors: [evgeni-burovski]
published: June 3, 2026
description: 'In this blog post, we discuss ways of dealing with compiled code in the Array API land.'
category: [Array API, GPU]
featuredImage:
  src: posts/array-api-aot-jit/array-api-aot-jit.png
  alt: 'Data APIs logo next to logos of NumPy, CuPy, PyTorch and JAX'
hero:
  imageSrc: posts/array-api-aot-jit/array-api-aot-jit.png
  imageAlt: 'Data APIs logo next to logos of NumPy, CuPy, PyTorch and JAX'
---

Python is known for being both easy and fast to develop in, and its slow execution
speeds. For several decades, the answer to "python is slow" has been
to write a C extension, so that computationally intensive parts of an application
proceed at C speeds. 
A prime example in scientific computing and data science is NumPy,
which provides the array abstraction, and performs internal looping over the array
data in C. 

> Historically, NumPy is geared towards a single-core CPU execution. The surge of popularity

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Historically, NumPy is geared towards a single-core CPU execution. The surge in popularity
```

of hardware accelerators, such as GPUs, gave rise to multiple array libraries--CuPy, PyTorch, JAX and others--which
encapsulate the compute power of accelerators
(which NumPy itself does not harness) within the NumPy-like array interface. 

Recent efforts of making general purpose libraries--SciPy and scikit-learn--use
alternative array providers via the [Array API](https://data-apis.org/array-api/latest/) demonstrated
significant [performance improvements](https://labs.quansight.org/blog/array-api-meta-blogpost).

> For end users, speedups of an order or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For end users, speedups of an order of
```

Reviewer: Maybe a 'for example' here to signal that speed ups come with other 'general purpose' library, e.g. scipy, not just skl estimators

> magnitude or more come "for free", from simply feeding correct arrays types to familiar

Author: ```suggestion
magnitude or more come "for free", from simply feeding correct arrays types to, for example, familiar
```

scikit-learn estimators.
For library developers, the work is to replace NumPy calls with their
[Array API analogs](https://data-apis.org/array-api/draft/tutorial_basic.html).
This way, all low-level details of CUDA programming are

> fully contained at the array library level (CuPy, PyTorch) and do not leak to either

Reviewer: ```suggestion
fully contained at the array library level (e.g., CuPy, PyTorch) and do not leak to either
```

> high-level library (SciPy, scikit-learn) or the end user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
high-level library (e.g., SciPy, scikit-learn) or the end user.
```

This approach works extremely well for computational pipelines implemented as vectorized python

> operations on arrays. This is not the full story however: Significant parts of user

Reviewer: feels awkward, what about?
```suggestion
operations on arrays. This is not the full story however; significant parts of user
```

libraries contain specialized compiled extensions for operations which are still too slow

> in pure python plus vectorized array manipulations, or are too awkward to implement in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in pure python and vectorized array manipulations, or are too awkward to implement in
```
maybe?

> pure python. How to deal with these kinds of situations is a big open question is: the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
pure python. How to deal with these kinds of situations is a big open question: the
```

existing body of C extensions is naturally CPU-only, and one cannot expect that
scikit-learn maintains both CPU and CUDA C kernels. Simply porting all C code

> to CUDA is also out of question: there is user demand for all of single- and

Reviewer: what about
```suggestion
to CUDA is also out of question: there is user demand across single- and
```

with speedups of more than an order of magnitude to significant slow-downs.

Before going into details, a note is in order. What we report on is a work in progress, in
a rapidly evolving field. While we expect specific details to age poorly, the main conclusions
are that (i) using just-in-time compilation in conjunction with Array API compatible backends
is a viable alternative to tried-and-tested ahead-of-time compiled C extensions, and
 (ii) for users, it is absolutely worth spending (a possibly time-boxed) effort to benchmark
their particular application.

The rest of the text is organized as follows: we [first](#details) briefly
outline the mathematical contents and discuss main implementation details, and
[then](#benchmarks) report on benchmarking results on multicore CPUs and GPUs.
(Readers not interested in mathematical or implementation details may skip straight
to the second section).

# Implementation details
<a name="details"></a>

We consider the [`RBFInterpolator` object](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.interpolate.RBFInterpolator.html) from `scipy.interpolate`. Note that we deliberately benchmark

> the behavior of a real production object, as (implemented in SciPy version 1.17)[https://github.com/scipy/scipy/blob/v1.17.0/scipy/interpolate/_rbfinterp.py#L62-L540], not a toy example.

Reviewer: this didn't render as a link - I am guessing it was supposed to? The `()` and `[]` are mixed I think

> the behavior of a real production object, as (implemented in SciPy version 1.17)[https://github.com/scipy/scipy/blob/v1.17.0/scipy/interpolate/_rbfinterp.py#L62-L540], not a toy example.

Author: ```suggestion
the behavior of a real production object, as [implemented in SciPy version 1.17](https://github.com/scipy/scipy/blob/v1.17.0/scipy/interpolate/_rbfinterp.py#L62-L540), not a toy example.
```

for numpy we use `numba`. 

For the JIT strategy in this exercise, we use the simplest approach: we keep the
"generic" Array API implementation of the `RBFInterpolator` class, and only replace the
`evaluate_xp` function with its jit-compiled version. We stress that this is not the
final end user API: currently, SciPy provides no public interface for jitting, and here
we reach into private implementation details of a SciPy object.

With `pytorch`, the incantation reads

```
evaluate_dynamo = torch.compile(fullgraph=True, dynamic=True)(evaluate_xp)
```

Here the `fullgraph=True` argument is to make sure that the compiled code does not
call back into the Python runtime, and `dynamic=True` argument ensures that we compile
a single kernel for all input sizes (instead of recompiling a new kernel for each array size).

With `jax`, we need to tell it that `xp` argument is special:

```
evaluate_jax = jax.jit(evaluate_xp, static_argnames=["xp"])
```

Both `torch.compile` and `jax.jit` are _tracing_ compilers: they analyze the types of
variables in the running program, and replace python operations on these variables

> with their efficient low-level analogs. This way they manage to convert to machine code

Reviewer: maybe?
```suggestion
with their efficient low-level analogs. This way they manage to convert to machine code,
```

our backend-generic `evaluate_xp` function which uses the runtime-defined `xp` argument.

The very fact that invoking this kind of highly non-trivial machinery fits in a single
line of python code feels like a minor miracle. 

With `numba`, we need to work a little more. First of all, Numba special-cases NumPy at

> the source code level, and is unable to work out that the `xp` argument is `numpy` at runtime

Reviewer: very naive question - what if you just amended the function to use `np` instead of `xp` ?

Author: Sigh. I had a paragraph talking about other numba quirks but removed it to avoid sounding like I'm criticizing numba (and getting too deep in the weeds). In short: no, there are other roadbumps. Would it help repeating some of info from the "JIT caveats" section?

Reviewer: Sorry can you explain more? Was numba being "unable to work out that the `xp` argument is `numpy`" a problem? Or this just an indication of the annoying problems faced but this particular problem was resolvable?

Author: Not resolvable, no. I tried rewording the paragraph and the next one with some more details. Does it read better now?

Reviewer: Ahhh it makes total sense now. Thanks

Running a little ahead of ourselves, we also had to explicitly use `numba.prange` in
the loops for performance reasons. Overall, `numba` turned out to be both the least
performant and the most capricious of the JIT variants we consider here. The [JIT section
below](#numba) gives more details.

# Benchmark results
<a name="benchmarks"></a>

To measure performance across backends and devices, we use an example from the
[`RBFInterpolator` documentation](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.interpolate.RBFInterpolator.html), and perform evaluations with arrays of size
`N x N` with `N` ranging from 50 to 1000, using `torch`, `jax`, `numpy` as array backends,
in both *eager* and *jit* modes ("numpy jit" is `numba`). 
The computational complexity of a single run is approximately quadratic with the
problem size `N`.

In the eager mode, we ran benchmarks against SciPy version 1.17.0; the JIT modes are
from this [SciPy pull request](https://github.com/scipy/scipy/pull/23447). The benchmarking
scripts and results are available [in this repository](https://github.com/ev-br/bench_playground/).

## Benchmarks on a CPU

> While `numpy` execution is single-threaded even on a multi-core machine,`torch` and `jax`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While `numpy` execution is single-threaded even on a multi-core machine, `torch` and `jax`
```

internally use multiple cores by default. Therefore, we run benchmarks twice:
once on a consumer-grade laptop with 4-core Intel i5 processor, and then on a beefy 32-core
AMD Ryzen Threadripper 3970X system.

### Benchmarks on a laptop, CPU

The following results are from running [the benchmark](https://github.com/ev-br/bench_playground/blob/master/rbf_bench.py)
on a 4-core Intel i5 CPU laptop

![Benchmark results on 4-core CPU](/posts/array-api-aot-jit/cpu_bench.png)

We see that in the eager mode (left-hand panel), Jax and PyTorch evaluations are 2-5 times
slower than the AOT-compiled pythran code. In itself, it is not surprising that they
are slower; if anything it is surprising that the slowdown is "only" by a factor of 2-5!
We did not benchmark an uncompiled pure NumPy implementation: the "loopy" version is
expected to have abysmal performance, and a vectorized implementation is expected to
perform roughly in the same ballpark as eager `jax`/`pytorch`.

In the JIT mode however (right-hand panel), Jax and PyTorch are 3-5 times faster than
the AOT `pythran`-compiled implementation.
The origin of the speedup relative to `pythran` is not very clear; a potential factor is that both

> Jax and PyTorch are multi-threaded by default, while `pythran`-compiled code is single-threaded.

Reviewer: Just a question - are you saying the better performance with Jax and PyTorch is because it is running multi-threaded in JIT mode (but not in AOT..)?

Author: Am I saying this? Did not mean to, no. Both modes are affected by multithreading, that's for sure. JIT being faster than already compiled code is a tad surprising; one factor is multithreading yes (being looked at below, too). Whether it's the whole reason, I can't tell. 
Any suggestions to improve the wording?

Reviewer: Ah I am reading that it means: it may be one of the factors contributing to the better performance.
Maybe just a change to "a potential *contributing* factor" ?

Author: Thanks, updated.

(in principle, `pythran` can generate OpenMP parallel loops, but it is switched off

> in the SciPy build system).

Reviewer: what about

```suggestion
In principle, `pythran` can generate OpenMP parallel loops, but it is switched off
in the SciPy build system.
```

Surprisingly, `numba` fares much worse than `jax.jit` or `torch.compile`, and is about
three times slower than the AOT-compiled pythran version --- even though we explicitly
OpenMP parallelized the loops with `numba.prange`.

### Benchmarks on a multicore machine, CPU

To assess the effect of parallelizing the workload on a multicore machine, we rerun the same benchmark on a
32-core AMD Ryzen Threadripper 3970X system. We use the default parallelization settings, so that
`pytorch`, `jax` and `numba` use all available cores.

![Benchmark results on a 32-core CPU](/posts/array-api-aot-jit/cpu_bench_server.png) 

In the eager mode, Jax seems to parallelize a little better than other backends: when using all 32 cores, Jax is nearly 2x
faster than the (single-threaded!) AOT-compiled `numpy`/`pythran` code, while PyTorch is about 2x-3x slower.
So just throwing more CPU cores does not make things much faster by itself.

> In the JIT mode however, we get massive speed-ups: `jax` performs about 15 times better, with `torch` trailing with a speedup of about 10x.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the JIT mode however, we get massive speed-ups: `jax` performs about 15 times better, with `torch` trailing at a speedup of about 10x.
```
removes the double 'with'

> `numba` is seen to improve with increased CPU count, and on 32 CPU cores performs within 30% of the (single-threaded) AOT version.

Reviewer: What does the 30% mean? As in compared to AOT, JIT performs 1-1.3x faster?

Author: Yup, performs 0.7-1.3x faster, depending on the problem size.

### Force a single-threaded execution

Since parallelization shows to play a non-trivial role, we also perform an apples-to-apples benchmark run, where
we force a single-threaded execution for all backends (in fact, forcing single threading
is [not entirely straightforward](#single_core_stanza)). Below we display the *slowdown* of a single-core

> execution versus a default on 32 cores.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
execution versus default parallelization on 32 cores.
```
just to clarify what the default is?

![Benchmark results for a single-core vs 32-core execution](/posts/array-api-aot-jit/single_core_bench.png) 

The first bizarre observation is that NumPy eager execution gets twice faster with the
`OPENBLAS_NUM_THREADS=1` environment variable---despite the fact that both with and
without it, we verified with the process monitor that the execution only uses a single core. 
The exact cause remains a mystery; there is some adversarial interaction between OpenBLAS
(which is the SciPy's default linear algebra library) and `pythran`-compiled code.
[This SciPy issue](https://github.com/scipy/scipy/issues/23732) has further details.

Discounting the OpenBLAS / pythran conspiracy, all backends perform 2-5 times
slower when run on a single core. The important observation is that in all cases, the slowdown

> is less than 32, the number of cores for the "default" run. Therefore, if the raw performance is the only concern, embarrassing parallelism wins by a large margin: splitting the work across a `multiprocessing` pool of 32 processes, where each process is 5 times slower, still gives a 32/5=6.4-fold speedup budget! Whether this is practical for a particular application is of course strongly application dependent.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is less than 32, the number of cores for the "default" run. Therefore, if the raw performance is the only concern, parallelism wins by a large margin: splitting the work across a `multiprocessing` pool of 32 processes, where each process is 5 times slower, still gives a 32/5=6.4-fold speedup budget! Whether this is practical for a particular application is of course strongly application dependent.
```
?

## Benchmarks on CUDA

One of the salient points of the Array API compatible code is the ease of using CUDA GPUs.
We run the same benchmark with no code changes on a GPU with `jax`, `torch` and `cupy`
libraries. On machine with a GeForce RTX 2060 accelerator we obtain the following results:

![Benchmark results on a CUDA GPU](/posts/array-api-aot-jit/gpu_bench.png) 

Overall, performance benefits from using CUDA device are massive.

> In the JIT mode, PyTorch delivers up to 40x speed-up relative to the baseline `numpy`/`pythran` AOT on CPU, while Jax delivers up to 20x. (Curiously, Jax wins on multicore CPUs, while PyTorch seems to utilize a CUDA device better).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the JIT mode, PyTorch delivers up to 40x speed-up relative to the baseline `numpy`/`pythran` AOT on CPU, while Jax delivers up to 20x. Curiously, Jax wins on multicore CPUs, while PyTorch seems to utilize a CUDA device better.
```
this seems like an useful takeaway

The difference between eager and jit modes is not as pronounced on CUDA as it is on a multicore CPU
(with `torch`: on CPU, jitting changes the speedup from 1.6x to 16x, while on CUDA eager it gives 25x, and invoking JIT
further improves it by "just" 60% to a total of 40x.)

Performance profiles for running on CUDA are problem size dependent, especially with Jax eager. This in itself is not very surprising:
it is expected that only large enough workloads benefit from using GPUs, and the problem sizes in this study are rather small, actually.

> We also note that CuPy "only" delivers a speedup of about 3x relative to numpy, which is modest in comparison to Jax or PyTorch. Also note that in this study, we only used CuPy in the eager mode and did not use any CuPy jit capabilities (and therefore the CuPy results are identical on the two panels of the plot). We also did not attempt using `numba.cuda` which

Reviewer: maybe don't label in the plot "jit, cupy" ?

- <a name="single_core_stanza"></a> It is surprisingly awkward to control the threading behavior across backends, especially in the JIT context. To force a single-core execution, 
  we had to (i) force the LAPACK library to make linear algebra single-threaded, and (ii) switch off the internal thread
  management in the jit-compiled code. Depending on the backend and/or the linear algebra library, we needed at least some
  parts of the following incantation: `$ OPENBLAS_NUM_THREADS=1 MKL_NUM_THREADS=1 NUMBA_NUM_THREADS=1 OPENMP_NUM_THREADS=1 XLA_FLAGS=" --xla_force_host_platform_device_count=1 --xla_cpu_multi_thread_eigen=false intra_op_parallelism_threads=1"  taskset -c 0 python ...`.

- `torch.compile` hardcodes the number of threads at compile time, and uses a cached value which it stores somewhere on the file system. As a result, jit-compiled code may or may not react to attempts to control threading at runtime.
  See [this pytorch issue](https://github.com/pytorch/pytorch/issues/160812) for details.

> - <a name="numba"></a> Out of three JIT technologies we considered, `numba` is the most established, and I expected it to be the most mature. Alas, it turned out to be underwhelming on multiple counts. First of all, it required quite a bit more effort to get working. Attempting to compile a "vectorized" implementation runs into unexpected gaps in functionality (for instance, `np.prod(..., axis=-1)` does compile, and [a related feature request](https://github.com/numba/numba/issues/1269) has been open since 2015.) In effect, `numba` requires to rewrite code in a fairly specific, low-level "loopy" coding style. Second, controlling parallelism requires source code changes, too, and it is very easy to run into massive oversubscription. And even after rewriting the sources in the numba way, the performance is still trailing the performance of other JIT compilers by a large margin. While I absolutely am not claiming to be a numba expert, and it is full well possible that further code tweaks unlock stellar performance, in this experiment I did not manage to. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- <a name="numba"></a> Out of the three JIT technologies we considered, `numba` is the most established, and I expected it to be the most mature. Alas, it turned out to be underwhelming on multiple counts. First of all, it required quite a bit more effort to get working. Attempting to compile a "vectorized" implementation runs into unexpected gaps in functionality (for instance, `np.prod(..., axis=-1)` does compile, and [a related feature request](https://github.com/numba/numba/issues/1269) has been open since 2015.) In effect, `numba` requires to rewrite code in a fairly specific, low-level "loopy" coding style. Second, controlling parallelism requires source code changes, too, and it is very easy to run into massive oversubscription. And even after rewriting the sources in the numba way, the performance is still trailing the performance of other JIT compilers by a large margin. While I absolutely am not claiming to be a numba expert, and it is full well possible that further code tweaks unlock stellar performance, in this experiment I did not manage to. 
```

approach was to add an additional "generic backend": an Array API compatible pure-python reimplementation of the functionality of the compiled C kernel. These kinds of "generic" backends are amendable to just-in-time compilation,
which we showed to deliver performance benefits of up to an order of magnitude or more.

With the current state of JIT technologies, performance strongly depends on details and may require some tinkering
and fine-tuning. The eventual performance characteristics depend on the problem, on the available hardware, and
the software stack: a choice of the array library dictates the choice of the JIT technology. (And if anything,
the ease of moving between different array libraries is one of the high points of the whole Array API movement).
However even though a stellar performance improvement is not guaranteed, the effort/reward ratio very strongly favors
JIT versus developing more traditional compiled CUDA kernels, and it is hard to not recommend at least trying out the Array API + JIT based approach (potentially, as a time-boxed experiment).

From a library maintainer perspective, using mixed JIT/AOT implementation poses several open questions.

> First of all, what is the public interface for JITting, especially for stateful objects like scikit-learn estimators?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First of all, what is the public interface for JIT-ing, especially for stateful objects like scikit-learn estimators?
```

---
title: 'Array API adoption: what to do with compiled code'
authors: [evgeni-burovski]

> published: June 3, 2026

Reviewer 2: Could you update the day to the current date?

    vec = kernel_func(r, xp)
    return vec @ coeffs
```

Note an additional `xp` argument, which stands for an Array API compatible namespace, and we use `xp.where`, `xp.log`, and `xp.linalg.vector_norm` functions. The overall structure of the `RBFInterpolator` class is essentially as follows:

```python
from array_api_compat import array_namespace

class RBFInterpolator:
    def __init__(self, Y, d, ...):
        self.xp = array_namespace(Y, d)
        Y = self.xp.asarray(Y)
        d = self.xp.asarray(d)
        self.coeffs = ...           # fit the inputs
        self.Y = Y

    def __call__(self, x):
        x = self.xp.asarray(x)  # ensure x is a compatible array type
        if is_numpy(xp):
            return evaluate_pythran(x, self.Y, self.coeffs)    # pythran-compiled
        else:
            return evaluate_xp(x, self.Y, self.coeffs, self.xp)
```

This way, if `Y` and `d` are PyTorch tensors, an `RBFInterpolator` instance infers
the `xp` namespace to be `torch`, and `evaluate_xp` uses PyTorch functions to operate on
PyTorch tensors throughout.

## JIT compilation

First and foremost, we note that there is no single best JIT technology. JIT-ing is

> backend-specific: for PyTorch, we use `torch.dynamo`; for JAX, we use `jax.jit`; and

Reviewer 2: `torch.dynamo` -> [Dynamo](https://docs.pytorch.org/docs/2.12/user_guide/torch_compiler/torch.compiler_dynamo_overview.html) (`torch.compile`)

for NumPy, we use `numba`. 

For the JIT strategy in this exercise, we use the simplest approach: we keep the
"generic" Array API implementation of the `RBFInterpolator` class and only replace the
`evaluate_xp` function with its JIT-compiled version. We stress that this is not the
final end user API. Currently, SciPy provides no public interface for jitting, and here
we reach into private implementation details of a SciPy object.

> With `pytorch`, the incantation reads

Reviewer 2: `pytorch` -> `torch` or PyTorch (`pytorch` isn't a code object)

![Benchmark results on 4-core CPU](/posts/array-api-aot-jit/cpu_bench.png)

We see that, in the eager mode (left-hand panel), JAX and PyTorch evaluations are 2-5 times
slower than the AOT-compiled pythran code. In itself, it is not surprising that they
are slower; if anything, it is surprising that the slowdown is "only" by a factor of 2-5!
We did not benchmark an uncompiled pure NumPy implementation: the "loopy" version is
expected to have abysmal performance, and a vectorized implementation is expected to
perform roughly in the same ballpark as eager `jax`/`pytorch`.

In the JIT mode (right-hand panel), however, JAX and PyTorch are 3-5 times faster than
the AOT `pythran`-compiled implementation.
The origin of the speedup relative to `pythran` is not very clear; a potential contributing
factor is that both JAX and PyTorch are multi-threaded by default, while `pythran`-compiled
code is single-threaded. In principle, `pythran` can generate OpenMP parallel loops, but it is switched off
in the SciPy build system.

Surprisingly, `numba` fares much worse than `jax.jit` or `torch.compile` and is about
three times slower than the AOT-compiled pythran version, even though we explicitly

> OpenMP parallelized the loops with `numba.prange`.

Reviewer 2: "OpenMP parallelized" seems a little off, perhaps: 
```
parallelized the loops with `numba.prange` (which uses OpenMP under the hood).
```

---
title: 'Array API adoption: what to do with compiled code'
authors: [evgeni-burovski]
published: June 3, 2026

> description: 'In this blog post, we discuss ways of dealing with compiled code in the Array API land.'

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
description: 'In this blog post, we discuss ways of dealing with compiled code when adopting the Array API.'
```

category: [Array API, GPU]
featuredImage:
  src: posts/array-api-aot-jit/array-api-aot-jit.png
  alt: 'Data APIs logo next to logos of NumPy, CuPy, PyTorch and JAX'
hero:
  imageSrc: posts/array-api-aot-jit/array-api-aot-jit.png
  imageAlt: 'Data APIs logo next to logos of NumPy, CuPy, PyTorch and JAX'
---

Python is known for both being easy and fast to develop in, and its slow execution

> speeds. For several decades, the answer to "python is slow" has been

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
speeds. For several decades, the answer to "Python is slow" has been
```

to write a C extension, so that computationally intensive parts of an application
proceed at C speeds. 
A prime example in scientific computing and data science is NumPy,

> which provides an array abstraction, and performs internal looping over the array

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
which provides an array abstraction in Python, and performs internal looping over the array
```

> which provides the array abstraction, and performs internal looping over the array

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
which provides an array abstraction, and performs internal looping over the array
```

> which provides an array abstraction in Python, and performs internal looping over the array

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
which provides an array abstraction in Python and performs internal looping over the array
```

data in C. 

> Historically, NumPy is geared towards a single-core CPU execution. The surge in popularity

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Historically, NumPy is geared toward single-core CPU execution. The surge in popularity
```

> of hardware accelerators, such as GPUs, gave rise to multiple array libraries--CuPy, PyTorch, JAX and others--which

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
of hardware accelerators, such as GPUs, has given rise to multiple array libraries--CuPy, PyTorch, JAX and others--which
```

encapsulate the compute power of accelerators

> (which NumPy itself does not harness) within the NumPy-like array interface. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
(which NumPy itself does not harness) within a NumPy-like array interface. 
```

> Recent efforts of making general purpose libraries--SciPy and scikit-learn--use

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Recent efforts of making general purpose libraries, such as SciPy and scikit-learn, use
```

alternative array providers via the [Array API](https://data-apis.org/array-api/latest/) demonstrated
significant [performance improvements](https://labs.quansight.org/blog/array-api-meta-blogpost).
For end users, speedups of an order of

> magnitude or more come "for free", from simply feeding correct arrays types to, for example, familiar

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
magnitude or more come "for free" by simply feeding correct arrays types to, for example, familiar
```

scikit-learn estimators.
For library developers, the work is to replace NumPy calls with their
[Array API analogs](https://data-apis.org/array-api/draft/tutorial_basic.html).
This way, all low-level details of CUDA programming are
fully contained at the array library level (e.g., CuPy, PyTorch) and do not leak to either

> high-level library (e.g., SciPy, scikit-learn) or the end user.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
the higher-level library (e.g., SciPy, scikit-learn) or the end user.
```

> This approach works extremely well for computational pipelines implemented as vectorized python

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This approach works extremely well for computational pipelines implemented as vectorized Python
```

> operations on arrays. This is not the full story however; significant parts of user

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
operations on arrays. This is not the full story, however; significant parts of user
```

libraries contain specialized compiled extensions for operations which are still too slow
in pure python and vectorized array manipulations, or are too awkward to implement in

> pure python. How to deal with these kinds of situations is a big open question: the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
in pure Python and vectorized array manipulations, or are too awkward to implement in
pure Python. How to deal with these kinds of situations is a big open question: the
```

existing body of C extensions is naturally CPU-only, and one cannot expect that
scikit-learn maintains both CPU and CUDA C kernels. Simply porting all C code
to CUDA is also out of question: there is user demand across single- and
multi-core CPU compute, CUDA, and other types of hardware accelerators, such as

> ROCm or TPU---and the hardware landscape itself changes rapidly.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
ROCm or TPU--and the hardware landscape itself changes rapidly.
```

> In this work, we report on an experiment, where we take a SciPy object,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In this work, we report on an experiment where we take a SciPy object,
```

[`RBFInterpolator`](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.interpolate.RBFInterpolator.html) from `scipy.interpolate`, which is backed by
a dedicated C extension, extend it to support multicore CPUs and CUDA GPUs via Array API,
and evaluate it for performance and maintainability across several array backends and compute types.
We also consider an additional dimension: in addition to the classic ahead-of-time
compilation (AOT) in C, we compare with generating kernels on the fly via just-in-time

> compilation (JIT). Note that JIT technologies are backend-specific, and are much less mature

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
compilation (JIT). Note that JIT technologies are backend-specific and are much less mature
```

> than AOT technologies. In this work, we report on using `torch.compile`, `jax.jit` and `numba`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
than AOT technologies. In this work, we report on using `torch.compile`, `jax.jit`, and `numba`.
```

Depending on hardware and software tech stack, we find non-trivial performance differentials,
with speedups of more than an order of magnitude to significant slow-downs.

> Before going into details, a note is in order. What we report on is a work in progress, in

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Before going into details, a note is in order. What we report on is a work in progress and happening within the context of
```

is a viable alternative to tried-and-tested ahead-of-time compiled C extensions, and
 (ii) for users, it is absolutely worth spending (a possibly time-boxed) effort to benchmark
their particular application.

The rest of the text is organized as follows: we [first](#details) briefly
outline the mathematical contents and discuss main implementation details, and
[then](#benchmarks) report on benchmarking results on multicore CPUs and GPUs.
(Readers not interested in mathematical or implementation details may skip straight
to the second section).

# Implementation details
<a name="details"></a>

We consider the [`RBFInterpolator` object](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.interpolate.RBFInterpolator.html) from `scipy.interpolate`. Note that we deliberately benchmark
the behavior of a real production object, as [implemented in SciPy version 1.17](https://github.com/scipy/scipy/blob/v1.17.0/scipy/interpolate/_rbfinterp.py#L62-L540), not a toy example.

In this section, we start with a brief outline of the mathematics that `RBFInterpolator`
implements, then discuss the baseline implementation and its Array API compatible

> generalization. We then move on to describing our approach to jit compilation, which is

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
generalization. We then move on to describing our approach to JIT compilation, which is
```

specific for different array libraries.

## Background: Radial basis functions

Glossing over the details, the mathematical contents behind `scipy.interpolate.RBFInterpolator`

> is as follows. Given a collection of $m$ vectors, $X_i$, in an N-dimensional space, and $m$ scalar "values", $D_i$, we want to construct a function $F(x)$, which accepts N-dimensional vectors, and takes the given values $D_i$ at $X_i$.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
is as follows. Given a collection of $m$ vectors, $X_i$, in an N-dimensional space, and $m$ scalar "values", $D_i$, we want to construct a function $F(x)$ which accepts N-dimensional vectors and takes the given values $D_i$ at $X_i$.
```

> We take this function --- an RBF interpolant --- as a linear combination of _kernel functions_, centered at $X_i$:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We take this function--an RBF interpolant--as a linear combination of _kernel functions_, centered at $X_i$:
```

$$
F(x) = \sum_{i=1}^m C_i f(|x - X_i|)
$$

> where $f(\cdot)$ is the scalar *kernel function*, and $|x - X_i|$ is the norm of the N-dimensional vector $x - X_i$. The coefficients, $C_i$, are defined by the inputs $X_i$ and $D_i$.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
where $f(\cdot)$ is the scalar *kernel function* and $|x - X_i|$ is the norm of the N-dimensional vector $x - X_i$. The coefficients, $C_i$, are defined by the inputs $X_i$ and $D_i$.
```

> The process thus involves two steps: we first *fit* the input data, $X_i$ and $D_i$, to find the coefficients, $C_i$; we then *predict* the value of the interpolant at the new vector $x$. The latter is forming the array of the kernel functions centered at $X_i$, and multiplying it by the array of coefficients. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The process thus involves two steps: we first *fit* the input data, $X_i$ and $D_i$, to find the coefficients, $C_i$; we then *predict* the value of the interpolant at the new vector $x$. The latter is performed by taking the array of the kernel functions centered at $X_i$ and multiplying it by the array of coefficients. 
```

> Typically we fit the data once, and evaluate the resulting $F(x)$ multiple times for varying inputs $x$. Thus evaluations are performance-critical, and we focus on evaluations in what follows.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Typically, we fit the data once and evaluate the resulting $F(x)$ multiple times for varying inputs $x$. Thus, evaluations are performance-critical, and we focus on evaluations in what follows.
```

## Baseline implementation

Glossing over non-essential details, the core evaluation routine of `RBFInterpolator` is conceptually equivalent to a direct translation of the mathematical formula for the RBF evaluation:

> ```

Reviewer 2: Syntax highlighting is missing in all code blocks, can add `python` after the triple backticks to fix it.

Author: Thanks done.

import numpy as np

def kernel_func(r):
    # the default RBF kernel, the so-called "thin plate spline" function
    if r == 0:
        return 0
    else:
        return r**2 * np.log(r)

def evaluate_np(x, Y, coeffs):
    # multiple data vectors are stacked into the `x` array
    npts, ndim = x.shape
    vec = np.empty((npts, Y.shape[0]))

    for i in range(npts):
        for j in range(Y.shape[0]):
            vec[i, j] = kernel_func(np.linalg.vector_norm(x[i, :] - Y[j, :]))

    return vec @ coeffs
```

Here `kernel_func` is the RBF basis function $f(r)$, and `coeffs` are coefficients, $C_i$, pre-computed during the *fit* stage.
Since we typically evaluate the interpolant at multiple vectors $x$, we always stack them into a 2-D array `x`.

> Consider evaluating an interpolant on a 50x50 grid in two dimensions. The `x` array than has the shape `(2500, 2)`, and looping over this large arrays in pure python is too slow to be practical. Therefore, `RBFInterpolator` in fact compiles the loop into C using the [`pythran`](https://pythran.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) ahead-of-time (AOT) compiler. In practice, this amounts to adding special comments to the python source and invoking the `pythran` compiler on the annotated source file:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Consider evaluating an interpolant on a 50x50 grid in two dimensions. The `x` array than has the shape `(2500, 2)`, and looping over this large arrays in pure Python is too slow to be practical. Therefore, `RBFInterpolator` in fact compiles the loop into C using the [`pythran`](https://pythran.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) ahead-of-time (AOT) compiler. In practice, this amounts to adding special comments to the Python source and invoking the `pythran` compiler on the annotated source file:
```

> Consider evaluating an interpolant on a 50x50 grid in two dimensions. The `x` array than has the shape `(2500, 2)`, and looping over this large arrays in pure Python is too slow to be practical. Therefore, `RBFInterpolator` in fact compiles the loop into C using the [`pythran`](https://pythran.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) ahead-of-time (AOT) compiler. In practice, this amounts to adding special comments to the Python source and invoking the `pythran` compiler on the annotated source file:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Consider evaluating an interpolant on a 50x50 grid in two dimensions. The `x` array than has the shape `(2500, 2)`, and looping over this large of an array in pure Python is too slow to be practical. Therefore, `RBFInterpolator` in fact compiles the loop into C using the [`pythran`](https://pythran.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) ahead-of-time (AOT) compiler. In practice, this amounts to adding special comments to the Python source and invoking the `pythran` compiler on the annotated source file:
```

```
# pythran export evaluate_pythran(float64[:, :], float64[:, :], float64[:])
def evaluate_pythran(x, Y, coeffs):
    # ... as before in `evaluate_np`
```

> During the build stage, the `pythran` compiler uses these special comments to transpile the annotated python functions into C++, and then builds them into a python-importable extension module. As a result, looping over arrays proceeds at C speeds.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
During the build stage, the `pythran` compiler uses these special comments to transpile the annotated Python functions into C++, and then builds them into a Python-importable extension module. As a result, looping over arrays proceeds at C speeds.
```

> During the build stage, the `pythran` compiler uses these special comments to transpile the annotated Python functions into C++, and then builds them into a Python-importable extension module. As a result, looping over arrays proceeds at C speeds.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
During the build stage, the `pythran` compiler uses these special comments to transpile the annotated Python functions into C++ and then builds them into a Python-importable extension module. As a result, looping over arrays proceeds at C speeds.
```

## Array API "generic" implementation
<a name="generic"></a>

> To generalize `RBFInterpolator` across Array API compatible backends, we use the [recommended pattern](https://data-apis.org/array-api/draft/migration_guide.html#array-consumers): we deduce the array namespace from the input arguments using the `array_namespace` function from the `array_api_compat` package, and fetch routines from this namespace instead of the `numpy` namespace. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To generalize `RBFInterpolator` across Array API compatible backends, we use the [recommended pattern](https://data-apis.org/array-api/draft/migration_guide.html#array-consumers): we deduce the array namespace from the input arguments using the `array_namespace` function from the `array_api_compat` package and fetch routines from this namespace instead of the `numpy` namespace. 
```

Since looping over array elements in alternative array backends is at least as slow as it is in `numpy`, we use a "vectorized" version of the `evaluate_np` routine above:

```
def kernel_func(r, xp):
    return xp.where(r == 0, 0, r**2 * xp.log(r))

def evaluate_xp(x, Y, coeffs, xp):
    r = xp.linalg.vector_norm(x[:, None, :] - Y[None, :, :], axis=-1)
    vec = kernel_func(r, xp)
    return vec @ coeffs

```

> Note an additional `xp` argument, which stands for an Array API compatible namespace, and we use `xp.where`, `xp.log` and `xp.linalg.vector_norm` functions. The overall structure of the `RBFInterpolator` class is essentially as follows:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Note an additional `xp` argument, which stands for an Array API compatible namespace, and we use `xp.where`, `xp.log`, and `xp.linalg.vector_norm` functions. The overall structure of the `RBFInterpolator` class is essentially as follows:
```

```
from array_api_compat import array_namespace

class RBFInterpolator:
    def __init__(self, Y, d, ...):
        self.xp = array_namespace(Y, d)
        Y = self.xp.asarray(Y)
        d = self.xp.asarray(d)
        self.coeffs = ...           # fit the inputs
        self.Y = Y

    def __call__(self, x):
        x = self.xp.asarray(x)  # ensure x is a compatible array type
        if is_numpy(xp):
            return evaluate_pythran(x, self.Y, self.coeffs)    # pythran-compiled
        else:
            return evaluate_xp(x, self.Y, self.coeffs, self.xp)
```

This way, if `Y` and `d` are PyTorch tensors, an `RBFInterpolator` instance infers
the `xp` namespace to be `torch`, and `evaluate_xp` uses PyTorch functions to operate on
PyTorch tensors throughout.

## JIT compilation

First and foremost, we note that there is no single best JIT technology. JIT-ing is

> backend-specific: for pytorch we use `torch.dynamo`, for `jax` we use `jax.jit`, and

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
backend-specific: for PyTorch, we use `torch.dynamo`; for JAX, we use `jax.jit`; and
```

> for numpy we use `numba`. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
for NumPy, we use `numba`. 
```

For the JIT strategy in this exercise, we use the simplest approach: we keep the

> "generic" Array API implementation of the `RBFInterpolator` class, and only replace the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
"generic" Array API implementation of the `RBFInterpolator` class and only replace the
```

> `evaluate_xp` function with its jit-compiled version. We stress that this is not the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`evaluate_xp` function with its JIT-compiled version. We stress that this is not the
```

> final end user API: currently, SciPy provides no public interface for jitting, and here

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
final end user API. Currently, SciPy provides no public interface for jitting, and here
```

we reach into private implementation details of a SciPy object.

With `pytorch`, the incantation reads

```
evaluate_dynamo = torch.compile(fullgraph=True, dynamic=True)(evaluate_xp)
```

> Here the `fullgraph=True` argument is to make sure that the jit-compiled code does not

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Here, the `fullgraph=True` argument is to make sure that the JIT-compiled code does not
```

call back into the Python runtime, and `dynamic=True` argument ensures that we compile

> a single kernel for all input sizes (instead of recompiling a new kernel for each array size).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
a single kernel for all input sizes instead of recompiling a new kernel for each array size.
```

> With `jax`, we need to tell it that `xp` argument is special:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
With `jax`, we need to tell it that the `xp` argument is special:
```

```
evaluate_jax = jax.jit(evaluate_xp, static_argnames=["xp"])
```

Both `torch.compile` and `jax.jit` are _tracing_ compilers: they analyze the types of

> variables in the running program, and replace python operations on these variables

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
variables in the running program, and replace Python operations on these variables
```

> variables in the running program, and replace Python operations on these variables

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
variables in the running program and replace Python operations on these variables
```

> with their efficient low-level analogs. This way they manage to convert to machine code,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
with their efficient low-level analogs. This way, they manage to convert to machine code
```

our backend-generic `evaluate_xp` function which uses the runtime-defined `xp` argument.

The very fact that invoking this kind of highly non-trivial machinery fits in a single

> line of python code feels like a minor miracle. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
line of Python code feels like a minor miracle. 
```

> With `numba`, we need to work a little more. First of all, Numba is not a tracing compiler;

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
With `numba`, we need a little more work. First of all, Numba is not a tracing compiler;
```

it special-cases NumPy at the source code level, and our approach of adding the `xp`
argument which only resolves to `numpy` at runtime breaks down.

> Second, Numba is having difficulties compiling "vectorized" constructions, and effectively

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Second, Numba currently has difficulties compiling "vectorized" constructions and effectively
```

forces writing explicit loops.

> We therefore had to `numba.njit` a "non-vectorized" version, `evaluate_np` above.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We therefore had to `numba.njit` a "non-vectorized" version (see `evaluate_np` above).
```

Running a little ahead of ourselves, we also had to explicitly use `numba.prange` in
the loops for performance reasons. Overall, `numba` turned out to be both the least
performant and the most capricious of the JIT variants we consider here. The [JIT section
below](#numba) gives more details.

# Benchmark results
<a name="benchmarks"></a>

> To measure performance across backends and devices, we use an example from the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To measure performance across backends and devices, we used an example from the
```

> [`RBFInterpolator` documentation](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.interpolate.RBFInterpolator.html) and perform evaluations with arrays of size

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[`RBFInterpolator` documentation](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.interpolate.RBFInterpolator.html) and performed evaluations with arrays of size
```

> [`RBFInterpolator` documentation](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.interpolate.RBFInterpolator.html), and perform evaluations with arrays of size

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[`RBFInterpolator` documentation](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generated/scipy.interpolate.RBFInterpolator.html) and perform evaluations with arrays of size
```

`N x N` with `N` ranging from 50 to 1000, using `torch`, `jax`, `numpy` as array backends,
in both *eager* and *jit* modes ("numpy jit" is `numba`). 
The computational complexity of a single run is approximately quadratic with the
problem size `N`.

> In the eager mode, we ran benchmarks against SciPy version 1.17.0; the JIT modes are

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In eager mode, we ran benchmarks against SciPy version 1.17.0; the JIT modes are
```

from this [SciPy pull request](https://github.com/scipy/scipy/pull/23447). The benchmarking
scripts and results are available [in this repository](https://github.com/ev-br/bench_playground/).

## Benchmarks on a CPU

While `numpy` execution is single-threaded even on a multi-core machine, `torch` and `jax`

> internally use multiple cores by default. Therefore, we run benchmarks twice:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
internally use multiple cores by default. Therefore, we ran benchmarks twice:
```

> once on a consumer-grade laptop with 4-core Intel i5 processor, and then on a beefy 32-core

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
once on a consumer-grade laptop with 4-core Intel i5 processor and then on a beefy 32-core
```

AMD Ryzen Threadripper 3970X system.

### Benchmarks on a laptop, CPU

The following results are from running [the benchmark](https://github.com/ev-br/bench_playground/blob/master/rbf_bench.py)
on a 4-core Intel i5 CPU laptop

![Benchmark results on 4-core CPU](/posts/array-api-aot-jit/cpu_bench.png)

> We see that in the eager mode (left-hand panel), Jax and PyTorch evaluations are 2-5 times

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We see that, in the eager mode (left-hand panel), JAX and PyTorch evaluations are 2-5 times
```

slower than the AOT-compiled pythran code. In itself, it is not surprising that they

> are slower; if anything it is surprising that the slowdown is "only" by a factor of 2-5!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
are slower; if anything, it is surprising that the slowdown is "only" by a factor of 2-5!
```

We did not benchmark an uncompiled pure NumPy implementation: the "loopy" version is
expected to have abysmal performance, and a vectorized implementation is expected to
perform roughly in the same ballpark as eager `jax`/`pytorch`.

> In the JIT mode however (right-hand panel), Jax and PyTorch are 3-5 times faster than

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the JIT mode (right-hand panel), however, JAX and PyTorch are 3-5 times faster than
```

the AOT `pythran`-compiled implementation.
The origin of the speedup relative to `pythran` is not very clear; a potential contributing

> factor is that both Jax and PyTorch are multi-threaded by default, while `pythran`-compiled

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
factor is that both JAX and PyTorch are multi-threaded by default, while `pythran`-compiled
```

code is single-threaded. In principle, `pythran` can generate OpenMP parallel loops, but it is switched off
in the SciPy build system.

> Surprisingly, `numba` fares much worse than `jax.jit` or `torch.compile`, and is about

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Surprisingly, `numba` fares much worse than `jax.jit` or `torch.compile` and is about
```

> three times slower than the AOT-compiled pythran version --- even though we explicitly

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
three times slower than the AOT-compiled pythran version, even though we explicitly
```

OpenMP parallelized the loops with `numba.prange`.

### Benchmarks on a multicore machine, CPU

> To assess the effect of parallelizing the workload on a multicore machine, we rerun the same benchmark on a

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To assess the effect of parallelizing the workload on a multicore machine, we reran the same benchmark on a
```

> 32-core AMD Ryzen Threadripper 3970X system. We use the default parallelization settings, so that

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
32-core AMD Ryzen Threadripper 3970X system. We used the default parallelization settings, so that
```

> `pytorch`, `jax` and `numba` use all available cores.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`pytorch`, `jax`, and `numba` used all available cores.
```

![Benchmark results on a 32-core CPU](/posts/array-api-aot-jit/cpu_bench_server.png) 

> In the eager mode, Jax seems to parallelize a little better than other backends: when using all 32 cores, Jax is nearly 2x

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In eager mode, JAX seems to parallelize a little better than other backends: when using all 32 cores, JAX is nearly 2x
```

faster than the (single-threaded!) AOT-compiled `numpy`/`pythran` code, while PyTorch is about 2x-3x slower.
So just throwing more CPU cores does not make things much faster by itself.

> In the JIT mode however, we get massive speed-ups: `jax` performs about 15 times better, with `torch` trailing at a speedup of about 10x.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In JIT mode, however, we get massive speed-ups: `jax` performs about 15 times better, with `torch` trailing at a speedup of about 10x.
```

> `numba` is seen to improve with increased CPU count, and on 32 CPU cores performs within 30% of the (single-threaded) AOT version.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`numba` is seen to improve with increased CPU count, and, on 32 CPU cores, performs within 30% of the (single-threaded) AOT version (i.e., 0.7-1.3x faster, depending on the problem size).
```

> ### Force a single-threaded execution

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Forced single-threaded execution
```

> Since parallelization shows to play a non-trivial role, we also perform an apples-to-apples benchmark run, where

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Since parallelization seems to play a non-trivial role, we also performed an apples-to-apples benchmark run where
```

> we force a single-threaded execution for all backends (in fact, forcing single threading

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
we forced single-threaded execution for all backends (in fact, forcing single threading
```

> is [not entirely straightforward](#single_core_stanza)). Below we display the *slowdown* of a single-core

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
is [not entirely straightforward](#single_core_stanza)). Below, we display the *slowdown* of a single-core
```

> is [not entirely straightforward](#single_core_stanza)). Below, we display the *slowdown* of a single-core

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
is [not entirely straightforward](#single_core_stanza)). Below, we display the *slowdown* of single-core
```

execution versus default parallelization on 32 cores.

> ![Benchmark results for a single-core vs 32-core execution](/posts/array-api-aot-jit/single_core_bench.png) 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
![Benchmark results for single-core vs 32-core execution](/posts/array-api-aot-jit/single_core_bench.png) 
```

> The first bizarre observation is that NumPy eager execution gets twice faster with the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The first bizarre observation is that NumPy eager execution becomes 2x faster with the
```

> `OPENBLAS_NUM_THREADS=1` environment variable---despite the fact that both with and

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`OPENBLAS_NUM_THREADS=1` environment variable despite the fact that, both with and
```

without it, we verified with the process monitor that the execution only uses a single core. 
The exact cause remains a mystery; there is some adversarial interaction between OpenBLAS
(which is the SciPy's default linear algebra library) and `pythran`-compiled code.
[This SciPy issue](https://github.com/scipy/scipy/issues/23732) has further details.

Discounting the OpenBLAS / pythran conspiracy, all backends perform 2-5 times

> slower when run on a single core. The important observation is that in all cases, the slowdown

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
slower when run on a single core. The important observation is that, in all cases, the slowdown
```

> is less than 32, the number of cores for the "default" run. Therefore, if the raw performance is the only concern, parallelism wins by a large margin: splitting the work across a `multiprocessing` pool of 32 processes, where each process is 5 times slower, still gives a 32/5=6.4-fold speedup budget! Whether this is practical for a particular application is of course strongly application dependent.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
is less than 32, the number of cores for the "default" run. Therefore, if raw performance is the only concern, parallelism wins by a large margin: splitting the work across a `multiprocessing` pool of 32 processes, where each process is 5 times slower, still gives a 32/5=6.4-fold speedup budget! Whether this is practical for a particular application is of course strongly application-dependent.
```

## Benchmarks on CUDA

One of the salient points of the Array API compatible code is the ease of using CUDA GPUs.

> We run the same benchmark with no code changes on a GPU with `jax`, `torch` and `cupy`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We ran the same benchmark with no code changes on a GPU with `jax`, `torch`, and `cupy`
```

> libraries. On machine with a GeForce RTX 2060 accelerator we obtain the following results:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
libraries. On a machine with a GeForce RTX 2060 accelerator, we obtain the following results:
```

![Benchmark results on a CUDA GPU](/posts/array-api-aot-jit/gpu_bench.png) 

Overall, performance benefits from using CUDA device are massive.

> In the JIT mode, PyTorch delivers up to 40x speed-up relative to the baseline `numpy`/`pythran` AOT on CPU, while Jax delivers up to 20x. Curiously, Jax wins on multicore CPUs, while PyTorch seems to utilize a CUDA device better.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In JIT mode, PyTorch delivers up to 40x speed-up relative to the baseline `numpy`/`pythran` AOT on CPU, while JAX delivers up to 20x. Curiously, JAX wins on multicore CPUs, while PyTorch seems to utilize a CUDA device better.
```

> The difference between eager and jit modes is not as pronounced on CUDA as it is on a multicore CPU

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The difference between eager and JIT modes is not as pronounced on CUDA as it is on a multicore CPU
```

> (with `torch`: on CPU, jitting changes the speedup from 1.6x to 16x, while on CUDA eager it gives 25x, and invoking JIT

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
(with `torch`: on CPU, jitting changes the speedup from 1.6x to 16x; while on CUDA, eager it gives 25x, and invoking JIT
```

further improves it by "just" 60% to a total of 40x.)

> Performance profiles for running on CUDA are problem size dependent, especially with Jax eager. This in itself is not very surprising:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Performance profiles for running on CUDA are problem size dependent, especially with JAX eager. This in itself is not very surprising.
```

> it is expected that only large enough workloads benefit from using GPUs, and the problem sizes in this study are rather small, actually.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It is expected that only large enough workloads benefit from using GPUs, and the problem sizes in this study are actually rather small.
```

> We also note that CuPy "only" delivers a speedup of about 3x relative to numpy, which is modest in comparison to Jax or PyTorch. Also note that in this study, we only used CuPy in the eager mode and did not use any CuPy jit capabilities (and therefore the CuPy results are identical on the two panels of the plot). We also did not attempt using `numba.cuda` which

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We also note that CuPy "only" delivers a speedup of about 3x relative to NumPy, which is modest in comparison to JAX or PyTorch. Also note that, in this study, we only used CuPy in eager mode and did not use any CuPy JIT capabilities (and therefore the CuPy results are identical on the two panels of the plot). We also did not attempt using `numba.cuda` which
```

> is a different, lower-level interface for CUDA programming from python.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
is a different, lower-level interface for CUDA programming from Python.
```

## JIT caveats

> Using JIT compilation in conjunction with the Array API looks to be a viable route towards multicore and GPU performance, especially for us mere mortals who are not ready to commit to maintaining dedicated CUDA kernels. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Using JIT compilation in conjunction with the Array API looks to be a viable route toward multicore and GPU performance, especially for us mere mortals who are not ready to commit to maintaining dedicated CUDA kernels. 
```

There is no single best JIT technology: performance characteristics of `jax.jit` and `torch.compile` strongly depend on details, and both technologies have rough edges. The field is rapidly evolving though, and the issues we faced in this exercise may or may not be relevant in a year from the time of writing:

- <a name="single_core_stanza"></a> It is surprisingly awkward to control the threading behavior across backends, especially in the JIT context. To force a single-core execution, 
  we had to (i) force the LAPACK library to make linear algebra single-threaded, and (ii) switch off the internal thread

>   management in the jit-compiled code. Depending on the backend and/or the linear algebra library, we needed at least some

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  management in the JIT-compiled code. Depending on the backend and/or the linear algebra library, we needed at least some
```

  parts of the following incantation: `$ OPENBLAS_NUM_THREADS=1 MKL_NUM_THREADS=1 NUMBA_NUM_THREADS=1 OPENMP_NUM_THREADS=1 XLA_FLAGS=" --xla_force_host_platform_device_count=1 --xla_cpu_multi_thread_eigen=false intra_op_parallelism_threads=1"  taskset -c 0 python ...`.

> - `torch.compile` hardcodes the number of threads at compile time, and uses a cached value which it stores somewhere on the file system. As a result, jit-compiled code may or may not react to attempts to control threading at runtime.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `torch.compile` hardcodes the number of threads at compile time and uses a cached value which it stores somewhere on the file system. As a result, JIT-compiled code may or may not react to attempts to control threading at runtime.
```

  See [this pytorch issue](https://github.com/pytorch/pytorch/issues/160812) for details.

> - <a name="numba"></a> Out of the three JIT technologies we considered, `numba` is the most established, and I expected it to be the most mature. Alas, it turned out to be underwhelming on multiple counts. First of all, it required quite a bit more effort to get working. Attempting to compile a "vectorized" implementation runs into unexpected gaps in functionality (for instance, `np.prod(..., axis=-1)` does compile, and [a related feature request](https://github.com/numba/numba/issues/1269) has been open since 2015.) In effect, `numba` requires to rewrite code in a fairly specific, low-level "loopy" coding style. Second, controlling parallelism requires source code changes, too, and it is very easy to run into massive oversubscription. And even after rewriting the sources in the numba way, the performance is still trailing the performance of other JIT compilers by a large margin. While I absolutely am not claiming to be a numba expert, and it is full well possible that further code tweaks unlock stellar performance, in this experiment I did not manage to. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- <a name="numba"></a> Out of the three JIT technologies we considered, Numba is the most established, and I expected it to be the most mature. Alas, it turned out to be underwhelming on multiple counts. First of all, it required quite a bit more effort to get working. Attempting to compile a "vectorized" implementation runs into unexpected gaps in functionality (for instance, `np.prod(..., axis=-1)` does not compile, and [a related feature request](https://github.com/numba/numba/issues/1269) has been open since 2015.) In effect, Numba requires rewriting code in a fairly specific, low-level "loopy" coding style. Second, controlling parallelism also requires source code changes, and it is very easy to run into massive oversubscription. And even after rewriting the sources in the Numba way, performance is still trailing the performance of other JIT compilers by a large margin. While I absolutely am not claiming to be a Numba expert and it is possible that further code tweaks could unlock stellar performance, at least in this experiment, I did not manage to. 
```

> - While `numba` nudges a developer towards using explicit loops, other JIT compilers rather strongly favor the alternative,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- While `numba` nudges a developer toward using explicit loops, other JIT compilers rather strongly favor the alternative,
```

> "vectorized" code style. `jax.jit` frowns on conditionals, branching and data-dependent control flow in general; `torch.compile` by design fully unrolls all explicit loops. For vectorized code however, both `jax.jit` and `torch.compile` do generate efficient native code, and eliminate temporaries from constructions like [`evaluate_xp`](#generic) which are memory-bound in eager mode. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
"vectorized" code style. `jax.jit` frowns on conditionals, branching, and data-dependent control flow in general; `torch.compile` by design fully unrolls all explicit loops. For vectorized code, however, both `jax.jit` and `torch.compile` generate efficient native code and eliminate temporaries from constructions like [`evaluate_xp`](#generic) which are memory-bound in eager mode. 
```

> All in all, despite all the rough edges of all the current JIT tech, they are nothing but small hiccups compared to

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
All-in-all, despite all the rough edges of all the current JIT tech, they are nothing but small hiccups compared to
```

the complexity of dealing with manually written CUDA C kernels.

# Conclusions and outlook

Adopting Array API compatibility for library components written in terms of NumPy-like primitives has been previously

> shown to deliver significant performance improvements from seamlessly using CUDA devices---without writing

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
shown to deliver significant performance improvements from seamlessly using CUDA devices without writing
```

a single line of CUDA C code!
In this work, we expand on the previous work and consider routines which rely on dedicated compiled kernels. Our

> approach was to add an additional "generic backend": an Array API compatible pure-python reimplementation of the functionality of the compiled C kernel. These kinds of "generic" backends are amendable to just-in-time compilation,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
approach was to add an additional "generic backend": an Array API compatible pure-Python reimplementation of the functionality of the compiled C kernel. These kinds of "generic" backends are amendable to just-in-time compilation,
```

which we showed to deliver performance benefits of up to an order of magnitude or more.

With the current state of JIT technologies, performance strongly depends on details and may require some tinkering

> and fine-tuning. The eventual performance characteristics depend on the problem, on the available hardware, and

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
and fine-tuning. The eventual performance characteristics depend on the problem, on the available hardware, and on
```

> the software stack: a choice of the array library dictates the choice of the JIT technology. (And if anything,

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
the software stack: the choice of the array library dictates the choice of the JIT technology. (If anything,
```

> the ease of moving between different array libraries is one of the high points of the whole Array API movement).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
the ease of moving between different array libraries is one of the high points of the whole Array API movement.)
```

> However even though a stellar performance improvement is not guaranteed, the effort/reward ratio very strongly favors

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
However, even though a stellar performance improvement is not guaranteed, the effort/reward ratio very strongly favors
```

> JIT versus developing more traditional compiled CUDA kernels, and it is hard to not recommend at least trying out the Array API + JIT based approach (potentially, as a time-boxed experiment).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
JIT versus developing more traditional compiled CUDA kernels, and it is hard not to recommend at least trying out the Array API + JIT based approach (potentially, as a time-boxed experiment).
```

From a library maintainer perspective, using mixed JIT/AOT implementation poses several open questions.
First of all, what is the public interface for JIT-ing, especially for stateful objects like scikit-learn estimators?
In this experiment, we were reaching into private implementation details of the `RBFInterpolator` object, which works for one-off experimentation, but is not something a library can recommend for its general user base. 
At the time of writing, there is no universally-agreed upon answer, and the discussions are ongoing ([here is one example](https://github.com/data-apis/array-api-extra/issues/523)).

> One other concern for library developers is that duplicate backends obviously add to the maintenance load: there is more code to maintain, backends need to be kept in sync, and adding new features is more complicated. Ultimately, the decision on the performance / maintainability balance will continue to need to be done on a case-by-case basis. Devising ways to reduce duplication however is worth experimenting across the community.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
One other concern for library developers is that duplicate backends obviously add to the maintenance load: there is more code to maintain, backends need to be kept in sync, and adding new features is more complicated. Ultimately, the decision on the performance / maintainability balance will continue to need to be done on a case-by-case basis. Devising ways to reduce duplication is, however, worth experimenting across the community.
```
